README.md, before:

# Poetry Chatbot — Educator + Poet (v3)

Two-model poetry system: **Educator** (mentor/critic) + **Poet** (generator). Cloud training on Modal, local inference via llama.cpp (e.g. Mac). Training data via Claude API. See [docs/ARCHITECTURE.md](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) for overview and [docs/DESIGN.md](docs/DESIGN.md) for full spec.

## Model choice

**Base: Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct** (`Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct`). Apache 2.0 license, strong for nuanced text. Two Q4_K_M models (~4.5GB each) fit easily on 24GB Mac Mini.

## Setup

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
# .env: ANTHROPIC_API_KEY, HF_TOKEN (for Hugging Face model downloads)
modal token set
modal secret create huggingface-secret HF_TOKEN=your_token
```

## Data prep

Add raw poetry to `data/raw/good/` and `data/raw/bad/`. Format: `.json` or `.jsonl` with `{author, title, poem}` per item; `.txt` as plain poem. Contrastive learning: bad poems (~114) paired with good (~34k) for comparisons.

## Full pipeline

| Step | What | Anthropic | Local |
|------|------|-----------|-------|
| 1 | Hard tasks (critiques, comparisons, revision_briefs) | Opus (forced) | — |
| 2 | Train interim educator on seed | 0 | Modal GPU |
| 3 | Export + download interim educator | 0 | Modal + local |
| 4 | Local educator generates briefs, autopsies, lessons | 0 | llama.cpp |
| 5 | Poet pairs | Opus (forced) | — |
| 6 | Prepare full training data | 0 | Combines JSONL |
| 7 | Train final educator + poet | 0 | Modal GPU |
| 8 | Export + download final models | 0 | Modal + local |

**Anthropic for hard tasks only:** critiques, comparisons, revision_briefs, poet_pairs use Claude (force_anthropic, no local fallback). In the full workflow, briefs, autopsies, and lessons are generated by the **interim educator** (trained on seed, then run locally); you can also run `generate_briefs` / `generate_autopsies` / `generate_lessons` with Sonnet for one-off data. The workflow also runs `generate_dialogues.py` before the final prepare step.

### 1. Data generation (Claude API)

**Hard tasks (Opus):**
| Script | Input | Output |
|--------|-------|--------|
| `generate_critiques_seed` | raw good + bad | critiques_seed.jsonl (all bad + 200 good) |
| `generate_comparisons` | good + bad pairs | comparisons.jsonl |
| `generate_revision_briefs` | critiques_seed | revision_briefs_seed.jsonl |
| `generate_poet_pairs` | briefs + revision_briefs | pairs.jsonl |

**Easier (Sonnet):**
| Script | Input | Output |
|--------|-------|--------|
| `generate_briefs` | raw good | briefs.jsonl |
| `generate_autopsies` | raw bad | autopsies.jsonl |
| `generate_lessons` | craft questions | lessons.jsonl |

```bash
# Full run
python scripts/data_generation/generate_critiques_seed.py --limit-good 200
python scripts/data_generation/generate_comparisons.py
python scripts/data_generation/generate_revision_briefs.py --limit 50
python scripts/data_generation/generate_briefs.py --input data/raw/good --limit 200
python scripts/data_generation/generate_autopsies.py
python scripts/data_generation/generate_lessons.py --limit 10
python scripts/data_generation/generate_poet_pairs.py
```

### 2. Prepare training data

```bash
python scripts/data_generation/prepare_training_data.py [--educator-only] [--poet-only] [--min-samples N] [--seed N]
```

Combines outputs into chat format. `--min-samples N`: requires ≥N examples; if set, caps train/valid to N (quick test). Omit for full run.

### 3. Upload to Modal

```bash
python scripts/modal/upload_data.py
```

Uploads `data/educator_training/{train,valid}.jsonl` and `data/poet_training/{train,valid}.jsonl` to `poetry-data` volume.

### 4. Train + export (Modal)

```bash
# Educator
modal run scripts/modal/train_educator.py [--num-epochs-override N]
modal run scripts/modal/export_gguf.py::export_educator

# Poet
modal run scripts/modal/train_poet.py [--num-epochs-override N]
modal run scripts/modal/export_gguf.py::export_poet

# Or orchestrate both
modal run scripts/modal/modal_app.py [--educator-only] [--poet-only] [--train-only] [--num-epochs N]
```

### 5. Download + inference

```bash
modal volume get --force poetry-gguf qwen2.5-7b-educator-Q4_K_M.gguf models/
modal volume get --force poetry-gguf qwen2.5-7b-poet-Q4_K_M.gguf models/

python scripts/inference/pipeline.py "Write a poem about winter light" [--config PATH]
```

**Reference chat server:** Any client can call the educator via HTTP. Run `python serve_gpm.py [port]` (default 11435). `POST /api/chat` with JSON `{ "messages": [ {"role":"user","content":"..."} ] }` for streaming completion (application/x-ndjson).

## Full workflow

```bash
./scripts/run_full_workflow.sh
```

Runs: hard tasks (Opus) → prepare interim educator data → train interim educator on Modal → export/download interim GGUF → local interim educator generates briefs, autopsies, lessons → poet_pairs (Opus) → generate_dialogues → prepare full data → upload → train final educator + poet → export → download. Use `--skip-generation` if `train.jsonl` already exists.

## First test

```bash
./scripts/run_first_test.sh
```

Runs: minimal data (5 bad + 5 good critiques, 5 comparisons, 5 revision briefs, 5 briefs, 5 autopsies, 5 lessons, 10 poet pairs) → prepare (`--min-samples 5`) → upload → train both (1 epoch) → export → inference. Skips if `train.jsonl` exists.

## Optional: Rhyme-focused poet

Train a poet with stronger rhyme/meter. Two data paths: (1) **Curated from corpus:** run `select_strong_rhyme_poems.py` on good poems → `data/annotated/strong_rhyme_poems.jsonl`; then `prepare_rhyme_training_data.py` to build `data/rhyme_training/` (80% strong-rhyme + 20% general, anti-collapse). (2) **Claude-generated:** `generate_rhyme_pairs.py` produces form-specific brief+poem+critique pairs. Training: `config/rhyme_training.yaml`, `scripts/modal/train_rhyme_poet.py`. Eval/analysis: `rhyme_analyzer.py`, `meter_analyzer.py`, `form_registry.py`.

## Config

| File | Purpose |
|------|---------|
| `config/educator_training.yaml` | QLoRA (r=64, α=128, 4 epochs, max_seq 1024) |
| `config/poet_training.yaml` | QLoRA (r=64, α=128, 6 epochs, max_seq 512) |
| `config/rhyme_training.yaml` | Optional rhyme poet QLoRA / data mix |
| `config/export_pipeline.yaml` | Merge + GGUF Q4_K_M |
| `config/inference_config.yaml` | llama.cpp n_ctx, temperature, etc. |
| `config/model_registry.yaml` | Base model registry and fit guidance |
| `config/rev_flux_models.yaml` | RevFlux benchmark: trained vs vanilla Ollama model configs |
| `config/data_generation.yaml` | Data generation defaults |

## Structure

```
data/raw/{good,bad}/     # Poetry input
data/annotated/          # Claude outputs (critiques, autopsies, comparisons)
data/educator_training/  # train.jsonl, valid.jsonl
data/poet_training/      # train.jsonl, valid.jsonl
data/rhyme_training/     # optional rhyme poet data
persona/                 # educator_neutral.txt, persona_condensed.txt
adapters/                # optional LoRA adapters (e.g. poet_rhyme)
config/                  # YAML configs
scripts/{benchmarks,data_generation,modal,eval,inference,training}/
serve_gpm.py             # Reference HTTP chat server (POST /api/chat)
```

**Alternative inference:** If both models don’t fit in memory (e.g. 32B poet), use `scripts/inference/swapping_pipeline.py` to load one model at a time. **Vanilla Ollama:** the pipeline supports `educator_model_override` and `poet_model_override` (e.g. `ollama:qwen2.5:7b-instruct`) for comparing trained GGUF vs base models.

## Benchmarking / eval

### RevFlux (revision process benchmark)

`scripts/benchmarks/rev_flux/` measures **process dynamics**, not outcome quality: how much each line changes during revision, where change concentrates, and how this varies by prompt category, revision length, and model (trained GGUF vs vanilla Ollama).

```bash
# Run harness (all models, categories, revision lengths)
python scripts/benchmarks/rev_flux/run_harness.py [--visualize]

# Compare trained vs vanilla Ollama
python scripts/benchmarks/rev_flux/run_harness.py --models trained qwen2.5-7b --limit 2
python scripts/benchmarks/rev_flux/run_harness.py --list-models
```

Models: `config/rev_flux_models.yaml`. Run `ollama pull <model>` before using vanilla models. See `scripts/benchmarks/rev_flux/README.md` for full docs.

### Eval scripts

`scripts/eval/` provides deterministic and model-output checks:

| Script | Purpose |
|--------|---------|
| `rhyme_analyzer.py` | CMU Pronouncing Dictionary–based rhyme detection: scheme, rhyme quality, strict vs. slant. Input: poem text (stdin or file). |
| `meter_analyzer.py` | Scansion via CMU: metrical pattern, consistency, foot types. Input: poem text. |
| `form_registry.py` | Library of form definitions (sonnet, villanelle, limerick, etc.): rhyme scheme, line count, meter. Used by rhyme/meter analyzers and data generation. |
| `select_strong_rhyme_poems.py` | Run rhyme analysis on good poems; write those with strong CMU-verified rhyme to `data/annotated/strong_rhyme_poems.jsonl` for rhyme training. |
| `voice_consistency.py` | Check educator outputs for banned “LLM-ism” phrases and basic specificity; input JSONL with `output` or `response` or `content`. |

Commit message:

Enhance RevFlux documentation and add new JSON files for poetry revisions
- Updated the README.md to clarify the RevFlux benchmarking process, emphasizing the dynamics of revision analysis.
- Added new JSON files for various models, including `cliche_0_rev0_deepseek-coder-6.7b.json`, `cliche_0_rev0_llama3.1-8b.json`, and others, to facilitate comprehensive testing of poetry revisions.
- Improved the description of the RevFlux process dynamics to specify the role of trained models in the revision loop.

These changes improve the clarity of the documentation and expand the dataset for analyzing poetry revisions across different models.

README.md, after:

# Poetry Chatbot — Educator + Poet (v3)

Two-model poetry system: **Educator** (mentor/critic) + **Poet** (generator). Cloud training on Modal, local inference via llama.cpp (e.g. Mac). Training data via Claude API. See [docs/ARCHITECTURE.md](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) for overview and [docs/DESIGN.md](docs/DESIGN.md) for full spec.

## Model choice

**Base: Qwen 2.5 7B Instruct** (`Qwen/Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct`). Apache 2.0 license, strong for nuanced text. Two Q4_K_M models (~4.5GB each) fit easily on 24GB Mac Mini.

## Setup

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
# .env: ANTHROPIC_API_KEY, HF_TOKEN (for Hugging Face model downloads)
modal token set
modal secret create huggingface-secret HF_TOKEN=your_token
```

## Data prep

Add raw poetry to `data/raw/good/` and `data/raw/bad/`. Format: `.json` or `.jsonl` with `{author, title, poem}` per item; `.txt` as plain poem. Contrastive learning: bad poems (~114) paired with good (~34k) for comparisons.

## Full pipeline

| Step | What | Anthropic | Local |
|------|------|-----------|-------|
| 1 | Hard tasks (critiques, comparisons, revision_briefs) | Opus (forced) | — |
| 2 | Train interim educator on seed | 0 | Modal GPU |
| 3 | Export + download interim educator | 0 | Modal + local |
| 4 | Local educator generates briefs, autopsies, lessons | 0 | llama.cpp |
| 5 | Poet pairs | Opus (forced) | — |
| 6 | Prepare full training data | 0 | Combines JSONL |
| 7 | Train final educator + poet | 0 | Modal GPU |
| 8 | Export + download final models | 0 | Modal + local |

**Anthropic for hard tasks only:** critiques, comparisons, revision_briefs, poet_pairs use Claude (force_anthropic, no local fallback). In the full workflow, briefs, autopsies, and lessons are generated by the **interim educator** (trained on seed, then run locally); you can also run `generate_briefs` / `generate_autopsies` / `generate_lessons` with Sonnet for one-off data. The workflow also runs `generate_dialogues.py` before the final prepare step.

### 1. Data generation (Claude API)

**Hard tasks (Opus):**
| Script | Input | Output |
|--------|-------|--------|
| `generate_critiques_seed` | raw good + bad | critiques_seed.jsonl (all bad + 200 good) |
| `generate_comparisons` | good + bad pairs | comparisons.jsonl |
| `generate_revision_briefs` | critiques_seed | revision_briefs_seed.jsonl |
| `generate_poet_pairs` | briefs + revision_briefs | pairs.jsonl |

**Easier (Sonnet):**
| Script | Input | Output |
|--------|-------|--------|
| `generate_briefs` | raw good | briefs.jsonl |
| `generate_autopsies` | raw bad | autopsies.jsonl |
| `generate_lessons` | craft questions | lessons.jsonl |

```bash
# Full run
python scripts/data_generation/generate_critiques_seed.py --limit-good 200
python scripts/data_generation/generate_comparisons.py
python scripts/data_generation/generate_revision_briefs.py --limit 50
python scripts/data_generation/generate_briefs.py --input data/raw/good --limit 200
python scripts/data_generation/generate_autopsies.py
python scripts/data_generation/generate_lessons.py --limit 10
python scripts/data_generation/generate_poet_pairs.py
```

### 2. Prepare training data

```bash
python scripts/data_generation/prepare_training_data.py [--educator-only] [--poet-only] [--min-samples N] [--seed N]
```

Combines outputs into chat format. `--min-samples N`: requires ≥N examples; if set, caps train/valid to N (quick test). Omit for full run.

### 3. Upload to Modal

```bash
python scripts/modal/upload_data.py
```

Uploads `data/educator_training/{train,valid}.jsonl` and `data/poet_training/{train,valid}.jsonl` to `poetry-data` volume.

### 4. Train + export (Modal)

```bash
# Educator
modal run scripts/modal/train_educator.py [--num-epochs-override N]
modal run scripts/modal/export_gguf.py::export_educator

# Poet
modal run scripts/modal/train_poet.py [--num-epochs-override N]
modal run scripts/modal/export_gguf.py::export_poet

# Or orchestrate both
modal run scripts/modal/modal_app.py [--educator-only] [--poet-only] [--train-only] [--num-epochs N]
```

### 5. Download + inference

```bash
modal volume get --force poetry-gguf qwen2.5-7b-educator-Q4_K_M.gguf models/
modal volume get --force poetry-gguf qwen2.5-7b-poet-Q4_K_M.gguf models/

python scripts/inference/pipeline.py "Write a poem about winter light" [--config PATH]
```

**Reference chat server:** Any client can call the educator via HTTP. Run `python serve_gpm.py [port]` (default 11435). `POST /api/chat` with JSON `{ "messages": [ {"role":"user","content":"..."} ] }` for streaming completion (application/x-ndjson).

## Full workflow

```bash
./scripts/run_full_workflow.sh
```

Runs: hard tasks (Opus) → prepare interim educator data → train interim educator on Modal → export/download interim GGUF → local interim educator generates briefs, autopsies, lessons → poet_pairs (Opus) → generate_dialogues → prepare full data → upload → train final educator + poet → export → download. Use `--skip-generation` if `train.jsonl` already exists.

## First test

```bash
./scripts/run_first_test.sh
```

Runs: minimal data (5 bad + 5 good critiques, 5 comparisons, 5 revision briefs, 5 briefs, 5 autopsies, 5 lessons, 10 poet pairs) → prepare (`--min-samples 5`) → upload → train both (1 epoch) → export → inference. Skips if `train.jsonl` exists.

## Optional: Rhyme-focused poet

Train a poet with stronger rhyme/meter. Two data paths: (1) **Curated from corpus:** run `select_strong_rhyme_poems.py` on good poems → `data/annotated/strong_rhyme_poems.jsonl`; then `prepare_rhyme_training_data.py` to build `data/rhyme_training/` (80% strong-rhyme + 20% general, anti-collapse). (2) **Claude-generated:** `generate_rhyme_pairs.py` produces form-specific brief+poem+critique pairs. Training: `config/rhyme_training.yaml`, `scripts/modal/train_rhyme_poet.py`. Eval/analysis: `rhyme_analyzer.py`, `meter_analyzer.py`, `form_registry.py`.

## Config

| File | Purpose |
|------|---------|
| `config/educator_training.yaml` | QLoRA (r=64, α=128, 4 epochs, max_seq 1024) |
| `config/poet_training.yaml` | QLoRA (r=64, α=128, 6 epochs, max_seq 512) |
| `config/rhyme_training.yaml` | Optional rhyme poet QLoRA / data mix |
| `config/export_pipeline.yaml` | Merge + GGUF Q4_K_M |
| `config/inference_config.yaml` | llama.cpp n_ctx, temperature, etc. |
| `config/model_registry.yaml` | Base model registry and fit guidance |
| `config/rev_flux_models.yaml` | RevFlux benchmark: trained vs vanilla Ollama model configs |
| `config/data_generation.yaml` | Data generation defaults |

## Structure

```
data/raw/{good,bad}/     # Poetry input
data/annotated/          # Claude outputs (critiques, autopsies, comparisons)
data/educator_training/  # train.jsonl, valid.jsonl
data/poet_training/      # train.jsonl, valid.jsonl
data/rhyme_training/     # optional rhyme poet data
persona/                 # educator_neutral.txt, persona_condensed.txt
adapters/                # optional LoRA adapters (e.g. poet_rhyme)
config/                  # YAML configs
scripts/{benchmarks,data_generation,modal,eval,inference,training}/
serve_gpm.py             # Reference HTTP chat server (POST /api/chat)
```

**Alternative inference:** If both models don’t fit in memory (e.g. 32B poet), use `scripts/inference/swapping_pipeline.py` to load one model at a time. **Vanilla Ollama:** the pipeline supports `educator_model_override` and `poet_model_override` (e.g. `ollama:qwen2.5:7b-instruct`) for comparing trained GGUF vs base models.

## Benchmarking / eval

### RevFlux (revision process benchmark)

`scripts/benchmarks/rev_flux/` measures **process dynamics**, not outcome quality: how much each line changes during revision, where change concentrates, and how this varies by prompt category and revision length. Only the trained model runs the revision loop; vanilla models produce initial drafts only (for other comparisons).

```bash
# Run harness (all models, categories, revision lengths)
python scripts/benchmarks/rev_flux/run_harness.py [--visualize]

# Compare trained vs vanilla Ollama
python scripts/benchmarks/rev_flux/run_harness.py --models trained qwen2.5-7b --limit 2
python scripts/benchmarks/rev_flux/run_harness.py --list-models
```

Models: `config/rev_flux_models.yaml`. Run `ollama pull <model>` before using vanilla models. See `scripts/benchmarks/rev_flux/README.md` for full docs.

### Eval scripts

`scripts/eval/` provides deterministic and model-output checks:

| Script | Purpose |
|--------|---------|
| `rhyme_analyzer.py` | CMU Pronouncing Dictionary–based rhyme detection: scheme, rhyme quality, strict vs. slant. Input: poem text (stdin or file). |
| `meter_analyzer.py` | Scansion via CMU: metrical pattern, consistency, foot types. Input: poem text. |
| `form_registry.py` | Library of form definitions (sonnet, villanelle, limerick, etc.): rhyme scheme, line count, meter. Used by rhyme/meter analyzers and data generation. |
| `select_strong_rhyme_poems.py` | Run rhyme analysis on good poems; write those with strong CMU-verified rhyme to `data/annotated/strong_rhyme_poems.jsonl` for rhyme training. |
| `voice_consistency.py` | Check educator outputs for banned “LLM-ism” phrases and basic specificity; input JSONL with `output` or `response` or `content`. |
